Remember the trillion-dollar, 170-kilometer
mirrored city slicing through the Saudi desert?
On September 16th, it was put on trial by
the TEN most powerful men in Saudi Arabia.
The verdict: DEATH.
They carved it up, distributed the assets,
and left the carcass at the foot of Mount Horeb,
the exact mountain where Moses talked to God.
Hey, I’m Steve, this is Gigaprojects, and
you’re watching the grand finale of our
NEOM trilogy. It’s not what we expected
to show you, but the world moves fast.
First, the cold facts: not a single major
contract has been awarded to NEOM in 2025.
Remember in Part 2 when we said The Line would
run out of work without new funding? Yeah,
they ran out. The Line’s CDO Hickey and COO
Pendleton have already moved to Trojena
after its CEO Philip Gullett was let go.
And those Vault contractors from Part
2 who begged 'Fund us now or kiss the
2029 Asian Games goodbye?' Well, they were not
properly funded, so the Olympic Committee is now
in talks with China and South Korea about
moving the Asian Games to those countries.
Then our sources confirmed
what our evidence suggested:
The PIF has stopped all work on The Line, Magna
and Sindalah. They're dismantling NEOM: Oxagon's
Green Hydrogen plant goes to Saudi
Aramco. Sindalah goes to Red Sea
Global. NEOM's headquarters moves to Riyadh.
Thousands of international staff—fired.
The Line isn't just dead. It's being erased.
What you saw in Part 1—the transport systems,
the vertical city, the stadium floating
above the Chandelier— that was NEOM's
international staff's last hurrah. Their
final pitch deck before the pink slips.
This feels like the opening of
Sunset Boulevard—where the corpse
floating face-down narrates how he got there.
Welcome to the autopsy, where our corpse
is still winking at us — mostly dead.
Here’s something to understand about Saudi
culture: Wajh — your face, your reputation — makes
public failure worse than death. MBS will
never announce The Line's cancellation. Not
today. Not tomorrow. Not ever. Not because
he's delusional, but because he's Saudi.
Which means The Line will float in that
pool forever, pretending to be alive,
while everyone pretends not
to notice the bullet holes.
And the most beautiful part? YOU took
part in it. Every render you mocked,
every article you shared, every comment
"it's a prison" —all of it was part of
the act. Because for most of its time
The Line wasn't a construction project.
The Line was misdirection. And
like all great misdirection,
it worked because we wanted to be fooled.
Today, we'll show you how MBS staged the most
expensive vanishing act in construction history.
How he made a trillion-dollar promise disappear
while delivering something nobody saw coming.
And we’ll do it with the help of our good
friends Christopher Nolan and Sir Michael Caine.
Welcome to The Prestige.
"Every magic trick consists of three
parts or acts. The first part is called
the PLEDGE. The magician shows you something
ordinary... a deck of cards, a bird, or a man."
"Today I'm presenting you The Line, a city with
one million residents with a length of 170km
that preserves 95% of nature within NEOM."
What MBS announced in 2021 was brilliant.
Start with the infrastructure everyone
else leaves for last—a 170-kilometer
metro called The Spine going through a
nature reserve around Moses mountain,
bigger than Serengeti or Yellowstone,
connecting five city-modules:
Red Sea Gateway
Hidden Marina.
Community One.
Community Two.
And at the terminus—NEOM International Airport.
Never mind there's already an airport nearby.
When you're building five cities and need
“something” at the end of your metro line,
you build another airport. Because why not?
Five architect firms. Five cities,
each growing outward from their metro
station. Urban planners loved it. Practical.
Buildable. Everything The Line isn't today.
Then MBS decided "practical" wasn't enough.
Prestige-Clip: In my travels. I have seen
the future. And it is a strange future
indeed. The world, ladies and gentlemen,
is on the brink of new, terrifying possibilities.
Every magician's pledge creates
a reality distortion field,
like that strange future Wolverine was talking
about. Time to make everyone else see it too.
Enter Hollywood concept artist Olivier Pron,
who’s worked on a bunch of Marvel movies. MBS’
brief was simple: "Make it worthy of Thanos."
This wasn't random—MBS grew up
on Star Wars, Dune, and Marvel.
So all those Star Wars and MCU
references we're making on our
channel? Those are tongue-in-cheek
explanations of MBS's playbook.
Step One: Thanosification
Pron took five horizontal cities,
and folded them like a taco into one
vertical megastructure. The problem is,
this compression shrank the city from
170 kilometers to just 4 kilometers—
three modules in a massive man-made
harbor called the Hidden Marina.
Step Two: Wakandafication
But MBS needed to grab the
world’s attention and keep them distracted
or his magic trick wouldn’t work. So what
was presented to the public combined the best
of both worlds: the 170-kilometer length from
the original metro AND the 500-meter walls
from Pron's design. The Line wasn't just
ambitious - it defied physics, economics,
and common sense. It was pure fantasy.
Two parallel glass walls creating a canyon of
mirrors, 500 meters tall, with a floating stadium
and underground transit at 350 kilometers per
hour. Impossible to build. Perfect for headlines.
"He shows you this object, perhaps
he asks you to inspect it...
to see that it is indeed real,
but of course it isn’t.."
Here's what MBS knew from day one: there’s no
way he could stay within his means and still
accomplish his goals. He needed access to all
of the wealth that Saudi Arabia had to offer.
And standing in his way? The
Saudi Public Investment Fund.
Here's how public investment funds are
supposed to work: you bank your oil money,
invest it globally, and live off the
returns forever. The one sacred rule is:
Never touch the principal. You can only spend
the interest - about 50 billion dollars a year.
Fifty billion sounds massive until you price MBS's
shopping list. His solution was pretty audacious:
Stop calling them projects. Call them
investments. Because investments can tap
the principal—that's not spending,
that's "reallocation of assets."
The PIF isn’t stupid, so they said
there were two ways he could do this.
The first was: find co-investors
to split the costs and the risk.
This worked at Oxagon's hydrogen plant
— a joint-venture between Air Products,
Acwa Power and NEOM - so MBS just
needed to make it work for The Line.
They advertised their commitment to
the project with what we're calling the
Big Ditch. A trench across the desert,
perfectly straight, fifty meters wide,
up to five meters deep, and 120,000 meters
long— it’s so big you can see it from space.
This is the view from the
eastern end at the airport.
As you can see in this timelapse,
from September 2022 to April ’24
they spent hundreds of millions on what they told
engineers was the foundation for the Spine metro,
connecting NEOM International Airport with The
Cantilever — a place which was never formally
announced and existed only on the NEOM homepage.
When we visited in 2024, it was biblical - endless
lines of trucks and excavators. This is how
it looked in the Sharma Valley … and this
is how it looked on the construction
site of Neom International Airport.
Here's what we discovered
when we returned in 2025:
Everything was deserted. Not abandoned —
wrapped up like a movie set after filming.
Look, you don't dig the foundation
of a 150-kilometer railway from
Nowhere A to Nowhere B in eighteen
months and then just pack it up.
Real infrastructure doesn't work
that way. Marketing campaigns do.
But the important question is -
Did it work? Boy howdy did it!
It got tens of thousands of news articles,
YouTubes, and Twitter threads -
which was exactly the point. It
was the world's longest billboard advertising
to investors: "Look! We're really doing this!
And the investors loved it! Fifty hedge-funds
invested hundreds of billions of dollars!
Nah, just joking. The Big Ditch
was a big swing-and-miss. When
the investors didn't bite, the
construction crews packed up.
So MBS had to try something else.
"The second act is called the TURN.
The magician takes the ordinary... and
makes it do something extraordinary."
The NEOM version of the Turn? Making a
700 billion dollar petroleum fund pay for
500 billion dollars in dreams,
and that’s not counting The Line.
The second way the PIF said he
could treat the gigaprojects
as investments is if they returned the
same rates as their current investments.
If you can’t find partners, you gotta show
profits. And that’s when the real illusion began.
According to the Wall Street Journal's
deep-dive into a 100-page PIF audit of Trojena:
"We call it a mutual dance of delusion. The
Crown Prince would go to the people running
NEOM and say, 'I want completely crazy
architecture that defies what we know
about how buildings are built,' as though
it could sort of get done realistically.
...and while that was happening, the PIF demanded
an IRR of 9% for ultra-luxury hotels
when 4% is the industry average.
NEOM's management got caught
in the middle, so they did what
any middle-management would do when facing
impossible demands: They hired consultants!
In 2021 they made a 300 million dollar call
to McKinsey, who brought in PwC. Together
they cooked the books so thoroughly, Gordon
Ramsay would've been impressed, here’s how:
So you can see this with Trojena
in this fall 2023 document we have,
you can see that they had a glamping site.
Glamping like this is sort of what they call
glamorous camping, like sort of fancy tents?
Yeah, and they originally were estimating
that they'd get $216 a night. Well,
after costs went up, they looked at
it closer and said, "Well, actually,
we were readjusting that to $704 a night.
How widespread was this practice?
It was common. We've talked to a
lot of people who took part in it.
Every Saudi gigaproject cooked the books,
because 9% IRR is mathematically impossible.
Take Shura Island with its signature
Coral Bloom concept—let’s assume you put
$100 million into building one of the eleven
Foster‑designed hotels which are about to open.
The IRR is interest, so 9%, and is calculated
over 15 years from the day you invest your money.
That means five years ago. Once it opens on
a half-finished island, you’ll spend another
five years troubleshooting operations and paying
influencers to TikTok your resort as the ‘next
Maldives. That leaves just five years to
somehow cough up $256 million in profit.
The only way this works in a virgin destination:
Assume $10,000 a night, booked solid year-round.
This is what actually happened on neighboring
Shebara Island. And you know what you get on
top? MBS as architect. Here’s John Pagano, the CEO
of Red Sea Global explaining the design process.
"His Royal Highness is very intimately involved in
the design process, wanting to drive us to do
things that have never been seen before. He
wanted to create something very different to
anything else in the world. We did design more
conventional hotels and he didn't like them,
you know, and again, he kept emphasizing I
want something that has never been seen before,
which is, if you think about it, very difficult.
But Pagano and architect Shaun Killa kept
iterating until MBS got what he wanted:
shimmering mirror domes floating on the
water like the impound yard for Area 51.
Result? 100 million TikTok views.
Meanwhile, right next door,
Foster + Partners' St. Regis and Nujuma
by Kengo Kuma barely broke 10 million.
Let that sink in. MBS is crushing
Foster and Kuma, the world's greatest
architects — 100 million to 10.
And you know what's never been
seen before? Guests pay 50% extra just
to sleep inside their TikTok video.
Now the reality check: After launching at the
delusional $10,000/night, MBS's viral orbs
still command $3,000. Foster and Kuma? $2,000.
Same amenities. One thousand dollar difference
for viral architecture.
The Pagano interview happened
at Desert Rock — another MBS monument
carved out of bare rock, let’s watch
how he navigated the dance of delusion.
We weren't trying to copy the Maldives or
the Seychelles or Dubai—he wanted
something quintessentially Saudi.
Let’s decode MBS's brief: He
wanted Tatooine from Star Wars.
Just look at George Lucas' Star Wars locations
in Tunisia. That's ancient desert architecture.
And Uncle Owen's moisture farm was
an actual hotel carved from rock.
He's attracted to things that are, you
know, never been seen before. I mean,
Desert Rock is another, you
know, manifestation of that.
Hotel rooms carved into a granite mountain,
that's uncle Owen's moisture farm reimagined.
Jabba's palace is Jean Nouvel’s Sharaan reserve
in Al Ula where a mountain is hollowed into
a sanctuary of pure rock and sculpted
light. Diriyah Gate - the original Saudi
capital restored from ruins. Adobe walls, shaded
sikkas, working wind-catchers. This IS Tatooine.
NEOM thought bigger meant better so
they promised Coruscant. But here's
the thing—even Tatooine is brutal to build.
"I looked at Al Ula and thought—the Nabataeans
built those tombs 2000 years ago with
their hands. How difficult can it be? Well,
that mountain is hard granite. When we tried
to excavate, we were breaking equipment."
Pagano carved just one floor
into the granite—enough for
Tiktok—then built regular apartments around it.
Now look at the original from Jean
Nouvel: "C'est le principe des puits,
c'est tout à fait la même chose. Et puis on a la
conscience d'une échelle tout à fait différents"
And this is Neom’s copy: Aquellum which just got
axed for being a money crematorium.You know what's
funny? The royal commission of AlUla will carve
one entrance into the sandstone, call it Jabba's
palace, build Mos Espa villas around it, and still
claim they're building Jean-Nouvel's 'Sharaan.'
'If I show His Royal Highness something and he
likes it, he expects that I can deliver it.'
Pagano's rule: guarantee
delivery, whatever the cost.
For the wooden architecture at Nujuma
and St. Regis, he went Swiss with
Blumer Lehmann. That's like buying a Patek
Philippe to hammer nails. Absurd? Maybe.
All three resorts opened two months EARLY.
In Saudi construction, that's delivering
a unicorn. And when you're racing against
NEOM for first delivery, that's priceless.
Because NEOM's Sindalah Island—also due November
2024—arrived 75% complete and 300% over budget.
That's what triggered NEOM's executive purge
and handed Sindalah to John Pagano. Here’s why:
We didn't hire external consultants to
come and be the delivery. And the
developer, we're the developer.
NEOM started expat-heavy, delivery-focused. But
Saudi CEO Nadhmi Al Nasr also institutionalized
Saudi disease: hire consultants to protect
wajh, not solve problems. When the project
fails, you fire the consultant
publicly, keeping your wajh intact.
But Nadhmi Al Nasr went further: Engineers who
said 'impossible' were fired. Managers
who delivered—poached by Red Sea Global.
This is how NEOM became a dream
factory with no delivery department.
What’s worse: Pagano understood what NEOM
never did: They had two masters. For MBS,
he built viral monuments. For the PIF, he
built money printers like Laheq Island.
Today we’re honored with his
Excellency, Yasser Al-Rumayyan,
who is the governor of the Public Investment Fund.
Yes. This is the guy who killed The Line
and Neom. Today he's celebrating what NEOM
should have been, because Red Sea Global delivers.
"Laheq is the first opportunity that many people
will have to own a home on
an island in the Red Sea."
No promises of zero-gravity living. Just, we have
500 villas and 220 condos to
sell and you too can own a home.
"So we came up with this idea of
what if we create a growing system,
a light touch development, a series
of repeatable modules, garden modules
that weave throughout the development. And
it's all about living, immersed in nature."
Translation: "Light touch" and
"Repeatable modules" means they
can build these villas for 500
grand and sell them for 5 million.
Pagano understood that a 9 % IRR works
only when you sell real estate. So he's
developing Saudi's pristine coastline,
selling it off-plan to millionaires,
banking super-profits. The Shebara orbs?
That's the loss-leader that gets you in
the door. The Shura and Laheq villas?
That's where he makes the money back.
Eliot Brown's "mutual dance of delusion" implies
MBS, the PIF and NEOM were equally delusional.
But looking at Pagano makes you think the
delusion was entirely NEOM’s. It makes you
think everyone was dancing on Tatooine while NEOM
was trying to dance on Coruscant. But was it?
"Now, you're looking for the secret, but
you won't find it... Because, of course,
you're not really looking. You don't really
want to know. You want to be fooled."
And fooled we were. For three years everyone
played along — the consultants, the executives,
the PIF — until March 2024, when the music
stopped, the spreadsheets sobered up,
half of NEOM’s leadership was fired,
and the consultancies were blacklisted.
When the PIF's hand-picked auditors
finally un-cooked the books,
they buried the real damage in the
footnotes of their annual report
Their gigaproject holdings, valued at 241 Billion
Riyal or $64 billion in 2023, fell to just 211
Billion Riyal or $56 billion by 2024—despite
pouring in billions throughout the year.
The annual report also mentions a mysterious $44
billion write-off with zero explanation.
Let's reverse-engineer the real numbers.
According to the PIFs own math (Method 1)
$56B at the end of 2024
$44B write-off
Total invested: $100B
Method 2 (MEED/Emirates tracking):
According to Emirates NBD and MEED projects,
$81 billion in construction contracts were
awarded across the Big five Giga projects
~$20B to smaller Gigaprojects
Total $100 billion.
Let's add the likely write-offs.
- Diriyah has some
expensive hotels. 4 billion. -
- ROSHN, the real estate developer. Zero.
- Qiddiya — Theme parks print money.. Zero.
- Red Sea has some pricey monuments. 4 billion.
- Scattered across smaller
Gigaprojects - 6 billion.
The other 30 must be Neom.
Let’s look at Neom’s write-offs
Infrastructure: 11 billion for the
workers communities plus $4B for the
cancelled spine-tunnel - complete loss
Oxagon—$11 billion for a floating port
city plus a green hydrogen plant for which
they built this year this giant windpark
and this giant solar farm. They sold Neom’s
shares worth $4B to Saudi Aramco. The rest of
Oxagon—the port expansion and strategic
investments continue – $6 billion.
Trojena - 9 billion to build an artificial
lake and ski-slopes. Write-off: $5 billion.
Sindalah Island - 3 billion - complete loss
Magna - 1 billion for Aquellum - complete loss.
And finally The Line - the mother of
all write-offs - where they’ve spent
three hundred and ninety billion dollars
on the megalopolis of the future.
Oh, wait. My bad, I misread that. The audit
revealed each module of the Line would cost
130 billion, not the 50 bil it was budgeted
at. So it would take 390 billion to do the
three modules planned in the first phase
… and that full 170 kilometer dream from
the marketing renders would cost 8.8
t-t-t-trillion dollars. That’s the
GDP of all of the Middle East … AND the
rest of the whole continent of Africa.
But even if they didn’t outspend a whole
continent, they still spent a crazy amount
of money, right? I mean this is their big
showpiece. Gimme a second to do some math…
Add that plus that, times that, carry the one…
Bringing us to the shocking revelation:
they've only spent 5 billion dollars
on the Line itself. Five bil.
The Line is disappearing in front of our eyes.
"But you wouldn't clap yet... because
making something disappear isn't enough."
Let’s face it. The PIF has won. On all fronts.
They've written NEOM down from $40 billion
to essentially nothing. Maybe $10 billion
remains viable in Trojena and Oxagon.
The rest of Neom? Declared worthless,
sold, or condemned to a state of cryo-sleep.
And despite MBS's grand ambitions, the PIF kept
total gigaproject spending at exactly $100 billion
over five years—never touching the principal,
operating within their means the whole time.
But MBS had one more card hidden up his sleeve.
We’re calling it the Deadline Doctrine.
While the books were still cooking, MBS entered
into international contracts that had firm
commitments. Every international deadline put
pressure on the PIF to keep makin’ it rain.
In 2029 they’re scheduled to host
the Asian Winter Games in Trojena,
with contracts signed with the
International Olympic Committee.
In 2030, the Riyadh Expo, with
agreements signed with 180 countries
In 2034, the FIFA World Cup, with eleven
stadiums promised to a billion fans,
and an agreement with FIFA that allows
the hooligans to ignore local laws,
take over and build whatever they
want, and stick Saudi with the bill.
But it wasn’t a blank check. The PIF tried
to fight back with 'value engineering' —
architect-speak for 'make it cheaper.' By
June 2025, their desperation went public.
But based on the multiple sources that we've
spoken to, NEOM has commissioned this RFP to
look at the feasibility of The Line as
it currently stands. One big element,
Joumanna, that NEOM is asking for is
to look at commercializing aspects
of the city and how it could turn into
something that makes business sense.
Think about that. They put
an open bounty on the Line:
Find something, ANYTHING, that could be
downsized, commercialized, or salvaged.
The likely answer was: Nothing.
Because MBS designed everything to be
unshrinkable through all-or-nothing propositions.
Remember what we said in
part-2 about building The Line?
You can only unplug the gap and flood the
Marina after you’ve built the raft foundations,
basements, and super-cores for all three modules.
Only then can they fill the
Marina for cruise ships to
sail in. So let's be clear there's no
phasing that first gigantic footprint.
You can’t build just one module, you have
to build three. You can’t just build one
wall now and one later, because
then the FIFA stadium would hang
in mid-air like Wile E. Coyote
realizing gravity isn’t optional.
The same applies for reducing the height, because
the stadium is above the chandelier. Remember
district four and MBS' trillionaire's palace from
Part 1? According to the Wall Street Journal,
NEOM staff begged MBS to reduce it from 500
to 300 meters tall to save billions. MBS
told the board this was 'inappropriate.'
Cost savings should be found elsewhere.
Every practical option dies
because MBS designed it that way.
He was both The Line's creator and its destroyer.
And we say MBS, because all-or-nothing
propositions are well known in politics
and negotiation, but unknown in
architecture for a good reason:
Architects have no leverage—the
building doesn't exist yet. You
can't threaten people by holding a rendering
hostage. When MBS gave the PIF the ultimatum
'build everything or build nothing,' he forgot
that nothing is always cheaper than something.
Like The Line, Trojena's Kraken and
Vault were designed to be unshrinkable.
We call this the Kraken because 'ski village'
is a serious misnomer – the Kraken is one of
the biggest buildings on the planet, featuring
a ski-able rooftop with 2.3km of slopes as its
tentacles. It's Saudi Arabia's first super sized
building and it’s visibly going vertical. As you
can see they made huge progress over the
last six months, the structural skeleton
is already complete in some sections with
the ski-able rooftop already installed.
The Kraken was designed to
be unvalue-engineerable,
because even at 2400m, it's not reliably cold
enough for a decent three month ski season. So
the Kraken is essentially a giant slope shaped
refrigerator with a ski resort underneath.
NEOM's USP was breakfast by the sea, lunch in the
mountains. That promise required unprecedented
infrastructure. Visitors would arrive at The
Mirage visitor center on the lower plateau,
then take the Time-Travel Tunnel 3.8km up to the
Vault. This massive transit hub—two interconnected
buildings, 200 meters high, 864 meters long—would
contain apartments, hotels, and a shopping mall.
Remember those contractors from Part 2 with their
desperate pleas? "Act now or
kiss the Asian Games goodbye"?
According to their timeline,
they should be pouring the raft
foundations and erecting the massive
steel cores. Now look where they're
standing now. They're still stuck
in May, while we're in October.
The PIF awarded their contracts. But according
to Vault contractors we’ve talked to,
the PIF ordered them to "slow-walk". Keep billing,
keep workers on site, but build at glacial speed.
The Olympic Committee immediately saw
the implications: a ski resort with no
way to move people? They started
making quiet calls. China? Korea?
Anyone interested in hosting the 2029 Asian Games?
In August the Korean Olympic Committee
leaked the story to the press:
Saudi Arabia cannot get their shit together.
MBS thought he was playing 4D chess. The PIF
just flipped the board. They sabotaged the
Asian Games to escape the deadline doctrine:
No Olympics, no deadline.
No deadline, no leverage.
Here's the corpus delicti:
"NEOM's Trojena Ski Village project
will be reopened for the main tender.”
Translation: The PIF is starting over and the
2029 Asian Games will not be happening in Trojena.
It’s likely Saudi’s hosting will be postponed
to 2033 -- so let the value-engineering begin!
The Kraken's frozen tentacles?
One slope will do. The Vault and
public transit? Please—this is
Saudi Arabia, we have G-Wagons.
Look at the PIF's vision for Trojena. See all that
green? That's grass for golf
courses where MBS wanted ice.
Repeat Pagano’s playbook, carpet Moses mountain
with luxury chalets, championship fairways
and most importantly: temperate grass that
doesn't need a nuclear plant to stay alive.
MBS offered the world's largest
refrigerator. The PIF offered green.
On a mountain where God once spoke, that
choice matters more than you might think.
What we just witnessed on September 16th wasn't
a snap decision. It was the final act
of Game of Thrones with spreadsheets.
To understand what really happened, you
need to remember that Riyadh is full of
royals who remember when MBS was just one
of a thousand princes. We'll call them the
'Old Guard.' Business leaders who knew King
Salman when he was the Governor of Riyadh.
For years, they backed MBS’ vision. Not because
they loved mirror cities, but because they agreed
with his diagnosis and his cure for what ails
Saudi Arabia - which I will tell you in a minute.
But when the bills came due—when 'expensive'
became 'existential'—they struck:
They poisoned their adversary's
power base... with audits.
First, they got MBS to fire his own visionaries
by making them look incompetent. By Fall 2024,
the contrast became undeniable. Red
Sea Global opened early to acclaim,
while Sindalah limped across late, way over
budget — and riddled with quality problems.
That performance gap was the final nail in
NEOM's coffin—triggering the management purge.
Soon after, the PIF’s audit chief Mike
Cheung set up shop at Neom. Then came the
audits. The write-offs. The "strategic
reviews”, which technically followed
MBS's orders while systematically
destroying his dream within 9 months.
The September 16th 'decision' was just
MBS signing the death certificate for
something the PIF had already killed.
But here's what our "Westerner" brains
cannot process: Why would they sabotage
the Asian Games? Forget the money—this
is about wajh. Failing to host the
Games isn't just embarrassing MBS,
it's humiliating Saudi Arabia in front of all
of Asia. The FIFA World Cup is even worse—
Why announce NEOM as a host city just to scrap it
one year later? Sure, they can move it to Al Ula,
but that's a catastrophic loss of
face they should avoid at all costs.
Drop your theories below, especially if you’re
a “local” — because this is the part of the
magic trick even we haven't figured out yet.
So is that the Prestige? Has this magic trick
failed like Siegfried and Roy’s last show,
with the PIF being the tiger? (Too soon?)
Nope. We’ve told you the what and the
how, but we haven’t told you the why.
Because building the buildings was never
the point. They were the magician’s left
hand keeping you distracted, while his
right hand was performing the real trick.
"You have to bring it back. That's why every
magic trick has a third act. The hardest part.
The part we call the PRESTIGE."
While we were focused on the
impossible architecture, Saudi Arabia was
rebuilding itself from the inside out.
The buildings were never the
trick. The trick was using
the buildings to transform an entire civilization.
Here's what actually happened in 2022
at what we call the Thanos moment:
Avengers, assemble!
When Olivier Pron dropped
those impossible renders, something clicked
inside MBS. The Line was never meant to be
built—it was meant to be the perfect cover for
what no Saudi ruler had dreamed in 80 years:
A new holiday decided by royal decree last month
marks the day in 1727 when Muhammad bin Saud,
founder of the first Saudi state, rose to
prominence after taking over the Emirate of
Diriya. This is 17 years before what historians
consider as the beginning of the Saudi state,
when bin Saud forged an alliance with Muhammad
ibn Abdul Wahab. So now they're taking that date
even earlier and in effect removing Muhammad
ibn Abdul Wahab from the story. Wahhabism is
a purist doctrine of Islam and has governed
the fabric of Saudi society for decades"
Three centuries of extremist religious
doctrine—deleted. And MBS
was pretty blunt about why:
"Today, we cannot attract capital, we cannot
have tourism, we cannot make progress with the
presence of extremist ideology in the Kingdom
of Saudi Arabia. If you want millions of
jobs, for unemployment to go down, if
you want the economy to improve... you
must uproot this project [of extremism]."
His approval rating jumped to 80% AFTER he
erased Wahhabism. Not despite it. Because
of it. But the real prestige wasn't just
deleting an old ideology. It was what
grew in its place. Here’s Rory Jones:
In 2023, for the first time, 50% of Saudi Arabia's
real GDP came from sources other than oil. It's
sort of like as MBS was trying to build NEOM,
this new place where anything was possible,
the rest of Saudi Arabia has actually become more
like NEOM, the place that he was dreaming of.
Absolutely. Yeah, definitely. I think MBS
has really initiated a bunch of changes in
the rest of the kingdom. The main, the raison
d'être for Neom, you know, isn't as strong.
So what will become of Neom? It's not
going away—MBS tied his reputation to it,
but here's what survival mode sounds like:
Do you have a budget? And the budget is clear?
We're working on it. The budget evolves every day.
"Budget evolves every day" means
'we're still fighting for money.' Heck,
NEOM didn't even make it into Saudi's 2026
budget after three years of top billing.
Remember the corpse floating in the pool, still
blinking at us? In Saudi culture, you don't
announce failure—you announce a new 'strategic
partnership' with Red Sea and 'elevate' Pagano
to NEOM's board. NEOM's got the brand, Red Sea's
got the builders, and Pagano's going to run it.
Start with Sindalah, and end with everything.
And we mean EVERYTHING! Pagano just freaking
announced expanding to Italy after MBS granted
him Saudi citizenship. Translation: Sindalah's
not a job—it's Pagano's entrance exam for a
tourism empire that won't stop at Saudi borders.
But there's one mystery we haven't solved:
Why there? Of all the places in Saudi Arabia
to stage this trillion-dollar magic trick,
why choose that specific patch of desert?
“The presently accepted location of the mountain
in the Sinai Peninsula in Egypt has been debated
by many scholars. The early chapters of
Exodus tell us, in fact, that Mount Sinai
is in Midian, which is in Saudi Arabia.”
The NEOM region used to be called Midian.
It’s where a young exiled Egyptian prince - Moses,
Musa to locals - spent a decade in apprenticeship
to the prophet Shuʿayb, learning the ancient
ways of the force before his greater calling.
The ancient Egyptians knew the nomads here as
the 'Shasu of Yahweh.' That's right, this is
the first time God's holiest name, יהוה appears
in recorded history together with a ZIP code. So
the Abrahamic God is technically a NEOM local.
“When we speak of a certain mountain, we usually
mean a certain peak. But people of the ancient
Middle East did not think of that. When the Bible
refers to Horeb as the mountain of God, think of
a mountain range rather than a specific peak.”
This is Jebel al-Lawz - also known as Mount Horeb.
“For the place where you now stand is holy ground”
For 35 centuries, this has been holy ground—where
Moses met the burning bush, Elijah heard God
whisper, and where a young Saudi Prince, far
from the throne, sought his own revelation.
According to Rory Jones, young MBS hiked on Mt
Horeb, and then built his royal palace here.
And now he’s upgrading God’s infrastructure.
Leyja rises where believers place the twelve
springs of Elim. Trojena's entry point,
The Mirage sits a stone’s throw from the Split
Rock where Moses struck water. The Time-Travel
Tunnel replaces dusty pilgrimage paths,
whisking tourists to the Vault, then up to
the 340-meter Discovery Tower — apparently
even divine WiFi needs a range extender.
And in between it all, something unexpected. NEOM
fenced off three massive strips of land to create
their Nature Reserve. Just by keeping out sheep
and camels, the desert started healing itself
- actual grass cover where there was only sand.
On top of natural recovery, they’ve planted 1.5
million native trees across 20 square kilometers,
terraforming barren desert into a dry savannah.
Once it started to flourish, they stocked
it with better looking wildlife. We saw the
proof firsthand: Ostriches - curious enough
to investigate our windows - sand gazelles,
Nubian ibexes, Arabian oryxes, all thriving.
They even plan to reintroduce Asian
cheetahs and Arabian leopards,
as soon as the dinner - sorry, prey
- population grows large enough.
While the world debated mirror walls and robot
deliveries, the old guard inside the PIF helped
MBS delete three centuries of religious law. On
September 16th, they checked their work: Wahhabism
dead? Check. Society transformed? Check. Time to
stop paying for the world's most expensive prop.
The Line is dead. Long live The
Line. Because here's the thing
about expensive funerals - they're not
for the dead, they're for the living.
MBS spent $100 billion on a funeral for
Wahhabism. The Line was just the world's
most breathtaking coffin. And on September
16th, the PIF finally buried it. Both of them.
Mountains have been moved,
Deserts have been rewilded,
Lakes are being conjured,
While futures are being decided.
And here’s a crazy thought: What if God was tired
of desert beige? What if He just wanted a better
view? What if He was tired of people using
Him as a justification for social oppression?
And what if, for the first time in a
very long while, someone was bold enough,
rich enough, maybe just crazy enough
… to try and change things for Him?
If that’s blasphemy, hit the comments; if
it’s prophecy, hit subscribe. As always,
I’m Steve—this is Gigaprojects—and I’ll
see you on Mount Horeb. Where apparently,
God's got better WiFi than NEOM ever will.